Everybody
call the order the meeting at 7 o'clock
on January 6, 2026 which meeting of the
year.
Uh roll call,
Bill, myself, Megan, and Would you guys
like to introduce yourselves again?
>> Uh, my name is Eric Johansson. I'm the
new public works supervisor for Rancho,
the new J. I apologize, but I I have a I
have the flu, so I don't want everybody
sick.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you. Thank you for coming in. You
should be home, but for your own sake.
>> Well, I'm getting I'm getting
with
cool.
All right.
>> Oh,
yeah.
>> And I'm Tom Welen with BHB.
>> Okay.
Additional questions. Yeah.
>> All right. So, no additions or changes
from the or agenda. Um approval of
minutes already get a chance to read
them, review them,
anything comments. I'll make a motion to
approve the minutes.
A second. All in favor?
>> I
public comment. Hold business. Permit
application IWWC 25-15. Jim Bano
handover long road replacement of an
existing long road bridge over river.
Any other discussion?
So I presented last and I think wanted
us to come back to answer any additional
questions.
>> I think
questions for the term if I remember
>> the pre I had three questions last time
and I'll start with the same three
questions this time.
>> Y who from the town is in charge of the
job.
So that the Jim Milano sort of the the
town administrator um or town engineer
with the town engineer.
>> No, I know.
>> Okay.
>> And the public works supervisor.
>> Oh yeah. So the the applicant is the the
town manager. So it's Jim Milano. So he
signed that and he's he's the applicant.
So he's in charge of the charity.
>> Uh I thought the applicant.
>> Well, we may be the applicant. It kind
of differs. Well, that's why I asked the
question because on the application it
says Jim Milano is the property owner
and city the applicant,
>> right? Um, I think it's, you know, it
differs at state and federal level where
the the applicant is has to be the
owner. So, it's on town level it kind of
changes from town to town. So, but we're
the authorized agent. So, where the the
designer and the CLA for the project do
um is also involved. They administer the
project, but uh it is a town project.
If I understand it's PHP on behalf of
the town, the applicant,
>> right?
>> Okay. Yeah. No, I got it. And I, you
know, Jim's here on the inter basis. You
know, Eric, I think you said your name
was you brand new and all new people.
You know, I just
when when something happens, and I know
Eric Anderson got called on plenty of
times with the the last bridge, you
know, he was in the middle of it, a
nebby, and he knew he was the guy who
was on the hook and uh
>> yeah, think
yeah, he attended all the meetings and
>> he did, you know, he was up there, you
know, he had a uh
>> that was, you know, sort of his
personality driven. But but he was
you knew he was the guy that if anybody
had a question, he was the guy you went
to.
>> So the product is seen by the state.
It's state administered. So it's, you
know, the contractor is hired. Correct
me if I'm wrong, Tom. He's the project
engineer. So he's really he's he's
behind all of the work.
>> Uh if if I can just jump in momentarily.
Um
uh on the Bunker Hill project, bridge
106, the sister project to this project,
uh Eric Anderson as the town
administrator,
uh was the dayto-day
administrator for the town of Andover.
So any questions that arose during the
construction of the project uh would
funnel from the contractor through uh in
this scenario uh SLR who was the
consultant inspection firm hired by the
town of Andover after undergoing a
thorough selection process and interview
process. Um and then ultimately any
final decisions
uh for pro for any issues of major or
substantial or major change
uh recommendations would be made to Eric
who then in turn would take those
recommendations to the first selectman
and the board of selectmen for final
confirmation of the town's position.
position on that particular issue. Uh,
in the absence of Eric, uh, I realize
Jim is acting as a as a interim town
administrator,
but in the meetings that I had with Eric
and Jim prior to
uh, Eric uh, leaving was that Jim was
going to step in and basically fill the
shoes of Eric in that role for this
project until such time as a permanent
town administrator could be hired by the
town.
I I hope that answers your question or
uh because the the project is 100%
uh owned by the town. Uh the only
involvement the only reason that Greg
and I are involved in the project is
because the the design and the
inspection of the project and the along
with the construction is 100%
reimburseable to the town of Andover by
federal and state monies
about the content of the
overseering
is a good example of that. I would not
guarantee even if it had a fulltime
personnel
>> and it wasn't intended to be a hard
question or a trick question. I just
want to make sure that Jim knows he's
the guy and if something comes up, you
know, he's he's the guy and as to, you
know, whoever, you know, I don't want to
hear later on after the problem might
come up and I hope it doesn't, but oh, I
didn't know I was responsible for that.
It it so it should have been, you know,
it kind of easy, but we ought to say it
and recognize it and go that way.
Um,
have you had conversation that you
provided?
>> No.
Talk to Eric about the old one on his
way out, but nothing with Jim yet about
this one.
>> Could you just touch base with him and
confirm that he is aware that he'll do
that?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> I mean, it sounds like he should be, you
know, with Greg and may have transition.
>> Yeah, he's been involved in
conversations with us. Yeah. It says
something to talk about a little several
times.
The second question, you know, was
in the
Connecticut DEP natural diversity
database coordination letter. You know,
it says a qualified herbologist required
to be on site at all times while
construction and clearing is taking
place.
And I just wondered if if we were
planning on complying with that
I guess it's a requirement from deep.
>> It is a requirement from deep and during
the normal course of construction. Um
uh we've we've the we we VHB originally
retained the services of Hank Gruner
to act as the herpatologist on this
project and he went through and did a
site investigation
of the project prior to the final design
plans being put together and he
developed a mitigation plan which was if
I remember correct correctly, part of
the uh application that we submitted to
the town of Andover for the inland
wetlands uh permit
and
giving all of his
recommendations as to
uh what requirements needed to be
followed by the contractor
uh based on the fact that there is a
high likelihood that we will encounter
turtles, snakes, etc. within the project
limits.
Um
when we go to put the coffer dams in
place prior to installing the coffer
dams for the removal of the existing
bridge, Hank will be doing an inwater
investigation
of uh the construction zone to ensure
that there aren't any nesting turtles
within the limits of the the coffer dam.
And then once again
uh after the coffer dam has been
installed, he will be once again
performing an inwater search just to
make sure that none of the turtles got
trapped behind the coffer dam before the
contractor commences work. Uh at the
time that the grubbing for the project
takes place, uh Hank will be meeting
with the contractor on site uh for the
proper placement of the sedimentation
control devices which also act as the um
the barriers for the uh
confinement of the project site to keep
the reptiles out to the project site
once they have come out of hibernation
and have left. Uh there will be periodic
sweeps performed by Hank during various
phases of construction that he will
physically perform sweeps of the project
site and remove any uh animals that are
found within the
limits of confinement to outside of
those areas. Uh he will be pro providing
training to the contractor's personnel
to help them identify the species in
question and um and how to and how to
reach out to him to uh come down and
take care of the removal of those uh
particular animals uh from within the
project site. Uh he will also be
monitoring the activity on the site so
that if uh various
uh sections of the encroachment fencing
need to be readjusted either in length
in width or whatever. He'll be there to
direct the subcontract or to direct the
contractor on how best to lay out and
install those to protect the species in
question.
Is Hank doing this voluntarily or is he
paid to do these activities? He is being
paid he is being he is actually under
subcontract to the consultant inspection
firm SLR that will be performing the
inspection work on the project uh just
as he did for them on the Bunker Hill
project and he is retained by him and uh
his services are billable and
reimburseable by the federal and state
monies.
So I think Jed's question is that it
basically says he'll be on site assuming
tank at all.
>> No, he will not. No, he he he is not
going to be on site at all times and the
deep requirements do not require that he
be on site at all times. They just
>> all activities occurring. I
I saw that I saw that requirement, you
know, several several places as I read
through all the material here. But, you
know, when
and we can call it up on the screen.
It's, you know, one of the enclosures
that it's listed there that says a
qualified herptologist is required all
in capital letters to be on site at all
times while construction and clearing is
taking place. And I said, you know, I
agree with everything that this
gentleman just said, and I know Hank
does a very, you know, conscientious
job, and I'm glad he's there because we
got all these different time frame
windows, uh, you know, and keeping all
that straight would be, uh, difficult.
But I know Hank would would do that, but
I just don't know how we would comply
or why we should be expected to comply.
But it doesn't seem that the right
answer is to ignore, you know, the
capitaliz required to be on site at all
times.
>> So I don't know, Tom or Greer, if you
can answer this. So are there any
periods in addition to what Tom just
described where there could be
construction or clearing activity that
aren't included in what you just said?
Would there be other activity being
performed where
>> well see the the the
we had the same requirements on
the Bunker Hill project.
>> Not everyone particular was involved in
that project. It's for your awareness.
Well, once once the once the
encroachment fence and the sedimentation
control fence is installed by the
contractor, which delineates the work
zone of the project,
and Hank has done his initial sweeps of
the project,
the only time that Deep required
them or Hank to perform
um
required sweeps was if there were
changes in stages of construction.
If if they went from say the the public
works side of the bridge
and then moved over to the park entrance
road side of the bridge and there hadn't
been any activity there for a number of
weeks or or months that Hank would have
to do redo a survey of that side before
the contractor would be allowed to
perform any work.
Um,
I ideally it's it's the the primary
thrust of
Hank's involvement in the project is in
the early spring when they when they
hibernate, when they come out of
hibernation and and start becoming
active and going to their their summer
habitat, if you will.
And
uh
once that is is out of the way and we
have the the work zone contained, then
it's it's Hank basically coming down on
a weekly basis to monitor the site, make
sure that there the encroachment fence
is still in good, is still intact,
hasn't been disturbed, and to do a a
general sweep of the project to make
sure that none of the affected species
have gotten back within the work zone
>> and that and that and that has been the
working relationship that we've had
between our office Hank and Don McKay of
NDDB Deep
>> an expert and just read through the
stuff and and you know this is a deep
requirement you know stay under their
jurisdiction and their regulation. So
>> uh
you know I don't know that it's
necessarily the town's responsibility to
monitor
you know the deep regulations for
protection of those most the reptiles
you know I was just reading through the
what it's for I think uh like the
wording it says the qualified her
herpatologist must be hired to work on
site with your construction crew during
the project construction period to be
sure that turtles will not be
unintentionally killed during the moving
of heavy equipment and tree clearing.
>> And then
another
>> deep down at the bottom of page two or
three
when you start with
site for the entire duration.
>> Yeah, it doesn't say it at all times. It
just says required to work and be on
site with your construction crew during
the project construction period. I think
it's just the way it's worded. It
doesn't
It just means that he's required to
like, you know, work work at the site,
not just
>> if if we were required to have Hank
there on site all day every day of the
project duration, it would cost more
than the construction of the project.
>> That's why I'm asking the question.
>> No, I
I know I understand the reasoning why.
>> I c I copied and pasted out of this so I
know the wording is correct. required to
be on site at all times while
construction and clearing is taking
place.
>> Yep.
>> So,
I assume there's going to be
construction and clearing going on
most days of the project. You know,
I don't know. I'm asking the question,
what does that line mean? That that's
that was my question.
Um,
I gave you the best answer that I could.
I think the only person that could
expand upon that question to fully
satisfy your question would be to ask it
of Hank Gruner.
>> Never
>> because he he's the one that works
specifically
in touch with Deep.
>> So, I think to Greg's point is that's a
based on Deep Review that was a
requirement that they implemented.
That's not necessarily a requirement
that Weatherlands is implementing.
So it's not
necessarily up to us to ensure that it's
all durable. We could make it a
requirement of our permit. Um I think to
the point of it then costing more than a
construction. I personally wouldn't
advocate for that but it may be
something for us to discuss.
I don't know. I'm confident that if
Hank's involved, there's going to be the
right thing happening than just
you'd rather ask the question up front
then, you know, after we get halfway in,
why didn't you do this? It's clearly
spelled that way here. and and I and I
fully understand your concerns and that
was the reason why we retained the
services of Hank early on in design
because
Hank Gruner wrote the manuals that Deep
follows to write their regulations.
>> Yeah. Okay.
I guess my third question, you know,
involved the clearing
to support the job. And uh Eric, one of
the reasons I think you're here tonight
is I know that public works did the
clearing over at
>> the Bunker Hill Bridge and I didn't know
if they were planning to do that again
at the Bunker Hill Bridge.
>> No, at the Yeah.
>> Okay. And so
um
what so what as I was you know trying to
get ready for tonight, one of the things
that that I
thought made me feel better was somehow
I got the opinion just like you
described that we were going to put in
the containment uh you know barriers and
that sort of thing first and then that
would confine find the area that we were
going to go in and clear so that we'd be
clearly demarked
uh where clearing should take place.
Um again, not smart enough to know if
there's any requirements that
we would need to cautions or any of that
kind of stuff. But as I look through the
sequence
of construction,
you the the first step is performed
clearing and grub around the site as
necessary.
And I thought if there were any concerns
from a wetlands point of view, they
weren't specified in that guidance. And
I could find no other guidance in all
the the stuff that I saw online that
might help you as the public works
supervisor understand other than leave
some trees you leave these big trees in
as much as you can. Um
so I was concerned about that. How how
you know what kind of precautions do you
take? And maybe it's it's none at all. I
don't know.
>> Sorry. the uh um but
I went, you know, I was
thinking back to uh
I was expecting step one to be install a
tracking pad to keep all the uh the junk
that we are down there working from
going up on on the roof.
And uh
I didn't I couldn't find anything in the
uh documentation about putting a
tracking pad up there. And and it
reminded me of a of a house that was
being built, 422 Lake Road. I tried to
go back in the archive and it didn't go
back that far yet. I guess we're still
working trying to get there. But step
one in that procedure was install a
tracking pad. Step two is install the
driveway and do all this before any of
the construction gets done. And sure
enough, they didn't install a tracking
pad. They didn't install the driveway.
And the wetlands were right up against
the road. And they drove all these
trying to haul logs and that out of
there through the wetland, got stuck in
the mud. It was just a real mess. And so
going to be the same time of year that
you're trying to do the clearing over
there in uh for the bridge, I think. And
I was trying to figure out where the
guidance is to you, you know, are we
going to put a tracking pad in, it's not
not listed in there. And uh
but at least when it said install
tracking pad and I saw no tracking pad
and I saw all the ruts of that, I said,
"Joe, this isn't, you know, right." and
he said, "Yeah, I'm working with the guy
trying to get him to do that." And it
was a long and painful process. You
know, the house was about done built
before they got the tracking fan in.
I'd like to not have that happen. And
that's what I'm looking for.
If if I could answer that question. Um
the the tree clearing that was done by
the town of Andover public works
department on Bunker Hill
was done specifically for the relocation
of the aerial utilities.
Nothing more.
The trees that were not affected by the
relocation of the aerial utilities
were then taken down by the contractor
within the stipulated time frames of the
contract.
The same scenario was discussed with
Eric Anderson
um
for the for this project and the trees.
We we had several meetings with Frontier
and Eversource
regarding where we could put the utility
poles
because unfortunately
uh early on in the design
the department decided to forego
going through the 4 process
uh with the uh FHWA
that would have enable enabled us to
take partial takes of the town park
and relocate the utilities there
for a temporary condition before
bringing them back to the edge of the
roadway in a permanent alignment. So as
such
we have very limited we can we can only
work within the confines of the street
line
and dot the the we had several meetings.
the the town
um marked out the trees that would need
to be trimmed and/or cut
to facilitate the relocation of the
utilities
and those trees were to be cut down. Any
remaining trees that need to be removed
as part of the construction project to
build to build the bridge will be done
by the contractor within the given time
frames as stipulated in the contract as
well as the grubbing of the trees that
the town would be cutting. We are not
disturbing any of the root systems. all
the stumps are are remaining in place
for the contractor that's going to build
the bridge to remove and at that point
that's when the sedimentation controls
etc would be put in place.
Um
we have no pro typically on
these types of projects the fed local
road projects we don't incorporate
tracking pads into the projects simply
because
the bridge is closed and under full
detour.
So we can con we can sort of confine the
areas of the mud within the project
limits.
Um
if the town
wants to move in that direction of
having us install tracking pads of some
sort,
we can certainly do so
via construction change order
if that would
uh make things
more palatable to you,
if that's the correct wording. Um
the only activities that will be going
on within the project site between now
and April 1st hopefully is going to be
the total relocation of the overhead
utilities and poles that are affected.
So that as of April 1st, the site can be
turned over to the contractor completely
and he can build the project within the
given time frame we have for the project
rather than uh we went through this
scenario on debunker hill project. We
had everything ready uh for the
utilities to do their relocation. The
contractor came in, uh, put in his
coffer dams under the guidance of Hank
Gruner. We were sitting there ready to
go, ready to drive micro piles,
uh, on April 1st as planned. And the
first utility poll got put into place on
April 16th. So, we were a month behind
schedule because of utility delays right
off the bat. And I think that
Frontier is a little bit more motivated
on Longill to get their utilities
relocated on time because unfortunately
at the intersection of US Route 6 and
Longill working back down towards the
public works department. Their telephone
poles are encased within the sidewalks
that were built.
And
when
those poles come out,
they would be responsible for the
replacement of the sidewalk, which they
don't want to be. And we struck a deal
that when they pull their poles, we're
going to replace and repair those
individual segments of sidewalk. So
it'll be a continuous blend from Route
Six all the way down to the entrance of
the park.
>> So who determines which trees need to be
removed by the town
>> to the construction? That was that was
done by Eric and I believe the former
public works director and with the
guidance of Frontier staking out where
they were proposing to put their utility
poles so that the poles and the
crossarms would remain within the street
line so there would be no aerial
trespass.
I can add to that if you if you'd like.
Um, go ahead. Okay. Well, I'll just No,
I'm trying to, you know, certainly I
didn't consider the fact that the road
was going to be closed. That might
that's a difference. Um,
the issue
that I learned was important about the
tracking pad over this house on Lake
Road was all the
muck that got carried out on the road,
washed down the road after it rains into
the storm drains and into the lake.
>> Yes. And I'm just so I'm trying to
figure out in my head. Again, not an
expert on any of this stuff, but um
does all that is all that mitigated by
the fact that the roads closed? No. I
guess the rain doesn't care whether the
road's closed or not. And but I you'd
have to go over and look at at the site.
And I guess I trust the engineers that
are out there making sure that, you
know, as they say, they can can find the
site a little bit better. Maybe that all
made sense. But
>> that was my concern on asking the
question is what I saw over on a
previous one and
>> and it was nice that we had enough
detail in there that when they didn't do
it, we said, you know, step one was
this, you didn't do it. What's up with
that?
>> No, I I totally agree.
>> Okay.
>> Um to qu some of your concerns, um I got
here November 1st. One of my first
duties here was to the trees were
already posted for the maximum or the
minimum of 10 days that they need to be
for the that the former uh uh public
works director was a tree warden. He
posted them. Um nobody we didn't have
any issues. So I was then told that they
need to come down sooner than later
because of the relocation of the poles
for Frontier. Uh my last job and I'm
sure Bill is that your name? Is that his
name? Oh,
I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm trying to
>> No, no, no, no. Please. I've been called
worse.
>> My last job at Coventry, uh I from what
I've noticed, Frontier is a nightmare
for me
or Eversource. Um I don't know if you're
familiar with the Rotary in Comry over
by South Street where Daily Road come
together. For four years, a telephone
pole sat and it we had to pave around it
because they wouldn't come and pull it
out. So, it was essential that we had to
get those trees out and get them out
quick because you have a small window
with these guys and if you don't meet
that window, you're all done. Um, so the
trees were posted. We when we cut them,
we cut them la uh last month. Uh, the
ground was frozen. All the trees were
laid down in the uh parking area, which
is all millings. Um, we left the stumps
because we didn't want to grub anything
out of there, disturb the bank. Um, we
didn't need an anti-tracking pad to come
in and out of there because we were in
the park itself. The park actually has a
paved area required, I believe, to come
in and out of there. Um, every night we
cleaned up our mess, so there was
nothing, no runoff or anything. and
every um the trees that didn't need to
come out that weren't going to be in the
way of the wires um had to come out
because the the existing trees that we
did cut out actually grew into those
trees and those trees probably would
never come back. So um I heard there was
some uh discussion about all the trees
we took out of there and that's why we
had to do that. Y
Do you anticipate additional tree or
heavy vegetation removal during the
project?
>> Uh, not on us. We're That's We're We're
done with as far as I know at this
point. We've the public works has done
all we were required to do there.
>> Um, again, I guess the contractor is
going to be taking the stumps out,
remediating the whole area and
everything. Yes, the the the contractor
will be removing the stumps uh as one of
the first courses of action as well as
removing the trees that need to be
removed on the downstream side of the
bridge and doing the stumping on that
side as well. And I guess there's one
tree that of major size that used to be
a uh iconic town of Andover uh landmark
with the uh with the uh the swing rope
on it uh that fell into the river and
our contractor will be removing that
from the river as well.
>> Are you installing the s fence prior or
after stumping?
>> The s fence gets installed prior to
stumping.
>> Okay. So we shouldn't have any sediment
washing when they pull some set of
>> pardon.
>> So we shouldn't have any sediment
washing into the the
>> No, no, no. There the the the site
should be fully contained uh with for
sedimentation control
uh prior to the stumps being pulled.
No,
>> that was all my questions.
have any concerns?
>> Um motion to approve application 25- 15.
>> Second motion. All in favor?
>> I
pass.
>> Thank you. That's it for that.
>> Thank you everyone.
Thank you.
Happy New Year.
>> Yeah, happy new year. Good luck.
>> Thanks.
>> All right. All right. So the next one
permit application IWWC25-16
Hansen County and DW application for
permit IWWC1
general permit for work in and around
various range systems and per
>> um yeah
that's the existing permit Joe
>> what
>> it says letter B permit will expire
March 6th. 2026.
>> Yeah, that's the 23-01.
>> Oh, okay. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Oh, well. Um, so again, I came into
this, um, I think this is very
progressive. Uh, the last town
commentary I worked for, uh, they were
trying to get something like this
through. Um, they were having a lot of
problems. uh around Pentry Lake with
this and uh there's a lot of discussion
over this and I think this is this is a
a good idea for everything we do. We're
kind of under a microscope now with
everything that we do. Um and I believe
in following the rules just like
everybody else. The town is not exempt
as much as people think they are. Um
the only time again this is more for
like a maintenance issue. Uh clearing
ditches um doing um maybe working around
outlets for catch basins um things of
that things of that nature. Some
retention pond uh you know clearing out
depending on to what degree we have to
do. Um, again, this is more of a
maintenance permit than anything else.
I just like to get it renewed. So, like
I said, we're we're playing by the rules
like everybody else has to. Um, there's
a lot of fingerpointing lately as
everybody sees. And, um, I just don't
want to be that guy. Everybody
saying, "Oh, the town's doing it. Why
can't I do it?" So, I want to I I want
to do it I want to do it legally and I
want to do it right. If I if I think
it's out of our scope of of doing this,
then I'm not going to do it and I'm
going to come back here to you guys and
um maybe take a take on a bigger permit
if needed. Um I'm very uh I'm very good
on communication. I like that. Um, like
I told Joe, you know, some of my bigger
projects that, you know, cleaning dishes
and things like that, I'll take a before
and after picture um, just so you guys
can see this, you know, scope of work
I'm doing. Um, if we need to, we'll put,
uh, you know, coffer dam, you know,
check coffer dams up um, for uh, if
we're cleaning like really long lengths
because what happens is when you clean
these dishes out, all of a sudden now
they're bare and you get all sorts of
silt and uh, run, you know, running
Um, so I we could put a few stone check
dams in there. We really don't get if we
have to, we'll put silt fence in. Um, if
we get in, you know, we building catch
basins, we cut out around the catch
basins and pull them out and fix them,
put them back in. A lot of times we
don't pave them that day because we have
to let them sit a few days. Um, a lot of
times we put like a filter fabric over
the top of that so nothing washes into
the catch basin. Um, there are we do
have um, and I can't think of the name
of them. actually make something. It's
like an actual sediment catch for inside
a catch basin. But the problem is with
those, they only work on the flat top
ones and not the curve back cuz it the
it doesn't catch the water coming behind
the in the throat with the catch basin.
So depending on what work we're doing, I
I always try to at least get something
over that so I catch the majority of the
of the silt running in. Um, but that's
about the extent of our
the permit for this.
Well, I appreciate your comment on, you
know, I guess I just recently gave up
chairman the planning and zoning and one
of the things that I tried very hard to
do was hold the town to a higher
standard than we held the public to
because I didn't want to hear about why
can the town do that and I can't do
that. And uh um my concern
with
with the uh
existing
application whatever uh you know the
permit that you've got now is that
there were not enough things coming to
the inland wetlands.
When you bring an application to us, I
always learn by reviewing it, asking
questions, and that sort of thing.
If we never hear from you or rarely hear
from you that that uh doesn't provide us
that opportunity to learn. So I'm, you
know, I'm I'm happy to go with what we
do, but that's the downside that I think
we as a commission miss is the
opportunity to engage with you, learn,
and be able to do our jobs better. So,
um, I know one of the things that when
we approved this, it was we didn't want
to spend a lot of time having to take
everything to the commission.
I can't remember the last time. I don't
think we've brought anything to the
commission since that application was
come in. Joe's briefed us on a couple of
things where, you know, public works is
is talked to Joe about it.
Um, but I do think we lose a little bit
of the uh the healthy growth because you
know that I think is you can you can
attend a lecture on inland wetlands
rules all you want but until you start
digging into the specifics and figuring
it out you're not really learning and u
I don't mind using the town to
facilitate our learning but but that's
that's my thought. I'm happy to hear
that you say that you want to hold
yourself to at least a highest standard
as anybody else here. And I think that's
important.
>> Well, it could because I know well
certain like this this application's
posted online. So I know with the other
one I posted a few things but with your
before and after pictures. I could add
those under it. you know, like a date
and a project and maybe a little
description of what you did along with
the pictures and then maybe you can kind
of
>> you can
as dedicated as you may think I am when
it's yours I go, "Okay, Joe, that's
yours.
You know, when it's ours, I'll do a
little bit more work on it."
>> I think the establishment of this permit
was a a good thing. I think prior to
that we weren't hearing from, you know,
public works about things that were
going on and I don't know if they were
in contact with the former buttons
agents, but if they were, that person
wasn't relaying it to us. So, I I think
it had established a better protocol
between the commission um the agent and
and public works. Um,
>> I like this. When I read this, I thought
this was very like progressive. Again,
they're trying to do this in Coventry
and they're just it's getting this all
over the place because the lake has the
sewer over there now and they have
clamped down on a lot of stuff down
there. So, every time we would go down
there to work, it was it was very like
it was horrible. So, they were trying to
put something like this in place over
there and they just keep meeting with
resistance.
>> Well, I agree that it's aggressive. My
question is, is it a little too
aggressive? Maybe. Maybe it is. Maybe it
didn't.
>> Progressive.
>> Progressive. progress. No, at all not I
apologize it's this fast.
>> Okay. Yeah. Well, it it certainly
>> gives you gives you a lot of latitude to
do a lot of stuff without coming here
and
>> and it hadn't been a problem yet.
>> We talked about it at the last meeting.
Why is nothing come to us? They said,
"Well, we've lost a bunch of employees
over at public works. We're not getting
done the jobs that we might have been
doing." Maybe that's got it. I don't
know. I I look I look forward to hearing
from you on some of the projects.
>> I like the idea of putting in the photos
too because in the event that you know
say you both go on to bigger and better
things whoever takes your place we have
those examples to say these are the
kinds of things that fall within the
permit you know um and I think it helps
public help too if they're interested to
have some you know increased
transparency.
I um I'm fine with you know the general
maintenance um you know like mowing
rough mowing you know I don't know if
you guys use a peon or something like
that or detention products things like
>> they have a like a ster and then we have
over the rail mower but the problem with
that is you can only get so far because
if it's wet you're going to run you're
going to run up so a lot of times you
either have to wait till dead of summer
to get in there when better condition or
>> just kind of m the outside edge
>> if you have a tree bed I don't know they
can write down here at at you know 316
and school road you know if you're
mowing on the edge like I'm fine with
that kind of stuff or you know if a tree
comes down goes in the stream you know
I'm fine with that um but if we're doing
you know I don't know head well repair
you know a new pipe across the road
obviously I think not ever have to come
to us even though it's still you know
routine maintenance for you guys
>> and I think culvert well I think when
there was replacements they were coming
right it was that wasn't included under
the maintenance or
>> well there was a certain
side.
>> That makes sense.
>> So like obviously
>> 24 replacement of clover drainage pipes
24 in or less in diameter that do not
contain a water course.
>> Okay.
>> And again though I can take pictures so
you can see it. I mean there's a lot of
infrastructure out there that's all
metal that the the bottoms are rotten
out and they you know they have you have
to replace the whole section. It's not.
So I can take a before after and I can
take like one dur while we're doing it
and one after as well just to so you
kind of have an inkling of of what we're
doing.
>> I think and I'm stretching my memory
here but when we talked about the
initial permit that you're seeking to
renew. So wetlands whether they're
man-made or natural fall under wetlands.
Um and so a lot of these systems create
wetlands where there may not have
previously been a wet and not that we
don't care about those. Um but we would
put you know natural water forces or um
wetlands that are involved in these
systems as a higher you know priority
for the commission to be involved in in
the um you know the wetland and the
technical soil sense that's being
generated by you know standard water
things like that.
And again, if you guys have any
questions, concerns about anything I'm
doing, please feel free to reach out to
me. I'm I'm I'm very flexible. If you
think I'm doing, you know, I don't know
all, um I if I don't know it, I'm going
to go find the answer out to it. I'm not
I'm I'm not that guy. I got I have
plenty of resources that I can I can tap
into to find out what what the best
course of action would be to take for
that job. And I'm not going to go do it
and say, "Oh, I should have did it. Oh,
I should have did XYZ first." I I don't
start my I don't start my jobs like
that. Like like you were saying with the
anti-tracking path, I know what that is.
And if it was something that mucky and
murky and everything like that, I would
have I would have done something totally
different with that
cuz that cuz again that that can end bad
all around the end of the day. It just
doesn't people think, oh, I'm just
coming in and out in the mud and stuff
like that. Well, all of a sudden, you
know, somebody's got a pond down the
road with their prized fish and killed
them all because they're Well, no. just
that.
>> Yeah. It becomes a whole
>> that little problem now became a bigger
problem.
>> Are there any language changes that you
guys would like to see the new permit?
>> No.
Okay. Um how long are we looking to did
we want to change the time for it for
how long the permit was it? Five years
before
>> uh three you guys pick for just to see
how it was going. I don't know.
>> I'm in favor of keeping three years.
>> I think
you guys okay with that?
>> I agree.
>> Keep looking up at you. I don't know.
>> I think there you can do up to 10 and
then you'll have to redo the current
which I mean it'd be basically the same
as what you're doing now, but it's like
you can extend it up to 10 years. So you
get another so we have to extend it one
more time after then it would have to be
a new permit but I mean it's basically
the same process then
>> yeah I think three years ago we revisit
it and make any changes at that point.
>> So I'll make a motion to approve um
permit 25-16 as written um for 3 years a
second. All those in favor?
I Okay. Motion pass.
Cool. Thank you. You guys are all set.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
>> All right. New business.
Any business?
>> No, nothing new.
>> Everybody's quiet for Christmas.
Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you. Nice
to meet you.
Nice to meet you.
Okay. Other business, new training
requirements for weapons, CTPA2-73.
>> Yeah, that was just um a public act. It
came into effect in October.
um printed out some copies of the
section that applies to us and it's
basically I think it requires um it
requires everybody on this on the well
permission to take the D training
course.
>> Do you know is this um the same training
that's been previously offered over the
years or is this is it training?
>> It's they redid it but it's the same
it's that same one that
comprehensive one that you can do online
and
>> say I did it a few years ago. So I've
been wondering do I need to redo it?
>> I think it was what did it say every
four years
said yeah any member staff person
serving to complete training for you got
to complete it
by January 2027 and then once every four
years after
or once a term if but our terms aren't
aren't longer than four years. Then
there's a disclaimer that yeah failure
of any member or staff person to
complete training shall not affect the
validity of any action of an ismood
agency.
It's required, but
>> if any decisions have been made.
>> Yeah.
>> And you could read a picture.
>> What's that?
>> You could.
>> Yeah. I probably I probably should redo
it because it's been a while. But it's
been over four years, but I'd have to do
it for Windom anyway.
>> Except I mean, as reading it, seems like
it doesn't matter if you did it before.
Yeah.
>> Can I ask a few questions about these or
is this like a
how how is this training program laid
out with like a question or you read
something and then you got to
answer a bunch of questions about what
you just read? Is that how it works
>> from?
Because I think I haven't done the
newest version of it. I don't think
>> so. right here, you know, and I took
this at least, you know, one program,
but and I thought it was very good.
Program consists of eight modules made
designed with text and video content,
interactive activities, all kinds of
stuff. So, you know, it'll have a little
pop quiz in the middle of it. And
>> yeah, there are blown away that you have
to pass, but you can keep as needed. the
>> Oh, you got to pass the quiz before you.
>> Yeah, but it's one of those like if you
don't pass it, you can just keep
returning until you pass it the next
module.
>> It's not a like a particularly difficult
if you paying attention. It's you just
go through it and then but it's good.
Yeah. Tell you like how to run a meeting
and
then it's got some of the signings and
site plan
things like that.
It'll take some
last time it took a while.
>> A while
maybe hour module.
>> Yeah.
>> So it's like eight hours total already.
>> Right. Take over. That's what I did. You
know, I didn't do one day
or something and try to pick out.
>> And the, you know, the thing that
disappointed me when I got to the end
because it was very good. I want to go
back and make copies of certain slides
and I couldn't figure out how to do
that.
>> So you would have to take the whole
course over again to get to the slide
that you want and I said I'll wait for a
while. It'll it'll come up as a
requirement again
as you go.
>> That's it. I can share that feedback
and see if it's essential or if they
could post.
Cool. Is this telling us where how to do
it?
>> The registration.
>> Oh, the registration.
>> Yeah.
>> I just did a budget worksheet also for
26.
>> Yeah, that was uh due like Thursday, I
think.
So,
there was no uh I I didn't know if we
guys wanted to add or change anything.
And I had
discussed moving our office supplies
budget to the building department by
buying it because we don't I don't like
bill for our own sheets of paper and
stuff.
>> So,
>> so I just realized that training for a
second, we have the whole year to
complete that.
>> Yeah. Okay. I was my brain was thinking
by January 27th of this year
>> got a little a little paddic internally
but okay that's
>> we have a whole year to do this whole
>> 27
>> and again I think it only said one
member on the commission
>> that was the former rule
that everyone does
>> but at the same time like previously
in the event that everyone didn't
there's not really any real application
>> in case I can't
>> yeah I mean our commission is going to
be shut down and take it back over by
you know on January 2nd if Phil fails to
complete it um yeah
>> so this has taken our budget from $400
currently to 1400
>> I don't know I didn't even
>> I don't think that correct
but
that was 1450 15. That was the budget
that I uh I had.
>> But you know, like it says July July of
25 to June 26.
>> Is that what was
>> 336?
Now the budget's 800. I don't I don't
know what those columns are mean.
>> What is the fiscal year? Is it
>> the fiscal year? First of July.
>> So the budget would then be for July 126
to June 30th. Yeah. 2011.
Now, maybe that number is what we've
expended so far. I don't know.
>> This is what we had last year.
>> I usually just Okay.
>> All I do is check the khaki wick
membership and make sure they didn't
raise their due and then put the same
number in from the previous that was
confusing because I don't think that
>> I'm guessing the first.
>> Yeah. Expenses to date maybe. a copy of
that.
>> I'm pretty sure
last year it was
last two years.
>> Yeah, if I remember correctly
changed.
>> Yeah, there was there was 1450 budgeted
just for me which was a lot. training
it was est or estimated but then for
2526 I was at 800 350 for training 200
for office supplies which Joe said
you're going to move and then 65 for
memberships and 1415 yeah total for 2526
so I think you want to keep it the same
>> I don't know
>> with the exception of moving office
supplies
>> yeah I don't know if that I don't want
to move it
but yeah
>> I'll just have to figure it out I'll
talk to Lyn and see if she can put it on
there. I don't know.
Worst case, we just keep them in there.
And
>> does this does that training cost money?
>> No.
>> The only thing that cost me lecture is
we did that uh that class.
>> Yeah. Certain things like that that pop
up.
>> If you wanted to do a workshop or
something like that, there's money for
that,
>> right? Which training is a bunch of 350
for that. So,
>> yeah.
>> So,
>> Oh, yeah. That's that must be This is
expenses then. We could try taking off,
but
>> it must be because $65. I'm pretty sure
that training was 65. Did you take it
too, Jim? I know. I took it.
>> Okay. Did you get to it? I said I didn't
want to take it, but I wanted to get the
the results.
>> Okay.
>> That was an option.
>> I never did get the
suppose. I forgot about that.
>> I'm just curious with the reduction in
the board foot. Does that still provide
room in the event we have, you know,
public hearings and things like that to
pay or is that just covering?
>> Yeah, I think it went based off of
actual for 23 24. They looked at what I
was I think that's what we kind of do
for the rest of them, too. So,
>> because we cancelled a few meetings, so
we don't we didn't have
>> Yeah. But yeah, if you have an extra if
we have like special meeting or a public
hearing or something, we might have more
than
>> I guess that's money.
>> And ultimately like if you're under in
training or office supplies as long as
like your department as a I'm going to
call it department like the commission
as a whole of the budget isn't under.
>> I mean that's why you know we could
probably keep the office supplies on
there just in in the case that
>> I don't know something happened
>> or you guys do training or you do
whatever you order. So maybe we'll keep
that on there just in case we have to
move that 200
>> if that's okay with you guys.
>> Yep.
>> Are you good with the budget?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Okay. I'm finally the way it is.
>> Do we need to motion to approve it or
anything? Or is it even in our control
to approve it?
>> Yeah. I don't Yeah. I don't know. I
think we just submit it and they they
approve it. I mean, you could motion,
but I don't need to.
All those in favor of keeping it the
same
motion
like that.
>> It's documented that we were in a room.
Yeah.
>> Not official motion. I don't know if
we're allowed to. I don't know.
>> I think that's everything, right?
>> Did you have an agent before enforcement
options?
>> Um, no. There's What's the one? There
was one on um
it was uh
what's the shot? The one over by there's
one over by the transfer station. I
forget the number of it, but um I got a
call that the guy was doing some work
back there. And I was going to meet with
him
this afternoon, but he had to work in
Cape Cod. I guess he's does like utility
work or something. And so I uh and then
there was a bunch of snow on the ground.
So we pushed it off till next week. So
I'm going to go look over there for it
was work in the upland view area
uh without a permit. So I got to go
chase him down. He was cooperative. So I
go down there and I haven't been on the
property yet. So
>> what's he doing down there?
>> I guess he was building um
using some gravel and stuff. He was
building a flat area for his kids to
ride their bikes or whatever down cuz
it's it's like on a pretty steep hill.
So, I think he was just making like a
flat area for him. Like I said, I don't
really uh
know the full scope of it. Um filling in
yet, I guess.
>> All right. Make a motion to adjurnn the
meeting at
say
on Tuesday January 6th six.
>> Second.
>> All in favor?
>> I
should pass.
>> Bye Jan.